dev container for OpenMP backend (#8)
CExA-project/CExA-Experimental: kokkos-dev-container/README.md

## Kokkos with OpenMP parallel host backend in VS Code with a Dev Container

We will see how to develop in VS Code using a Docker container based development environment that involves C++ development using the Kokkos library with OpenMP as the parallel programming backend on the CPU.

#### Steps to follow
* Installation of Visual Studio Code. 
* Installation of necessary extensions in VS Code. See below for details.
* Installation of a container management tool like Docker or Podman. 
* Opening the directory `devc_hellow` in VS Code.
* VS Code may automatically ask you to reopen the project in a container. Otherwise, you could manually do so by opening the Command Palette (Ctrl+Shift+P) and entering ">Dev Containers: Reopen in Container".
* If all goes well, all the requirements would be installed including a C++ compiler, CMake and Kokkos. A "build" directory would also be generated by CMake within the C++ project.

#### The development environment
* Ubuntu 22.04 is the base image of the container.
* The C++ compiler is GCC, installed via `build-essential`.

> * Kokkos version is 4.6.01, with OpenMP parallel host backend enabled. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Kokkos version is 5.1.1, with OpenMP parallel host backend enabled. 
```

Docker is the default container management tool expected by VS Code. Make sure the Docker daemon is running in order to use Docker. 

##### <ins>Installation and use of Podman

Docker requires the daemon to be running in the background. In order to start the daemon, one has to either be administrative privileges or have [rootless mode](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/rootless/) enabled. Podman presents a solution for a user to use a system in which the necessary software already installed (VS Code and Podman), without administrative privileges. 

See [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/remote/advancedcontainers/docker-options#_podman) for further information on using Podman with VS Code. The steps involved are:
* [Installation](https://podman.io/docs/installation) of Podman.

> * In VS Code: In Settings, changing the setting `Dev > Containers: Docker Path` from `docker` to `podman`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In VS Code: In Settings, changing the following settings:
  * `Dev > Containers: Docker Path` from `docker` to `podman`
  * `Dev > Containers: Docker Compose Path` from `docker-compose` to `podman-compose` 
```

##### <ins>Installation of extensions

The user needs to install the following extensions in host VS Code:
* “Dev Containers” extension. Note that the “Remote Development” extension contains “Dev Containers” too.
* “Docker” extension. Currently this extension will be installed in the Dev Container environment also. Note that the "Docker" extension is going to become "Container Tools" extension.

Note: “C/C++ Extension Pack” will be installed in the Dev Container environment. No harm if they are both in the host and the remote.

##### <ins>About CMake based project

There is a simple C++ project that links with [Kokkos](https://cexa-project.org/news/2025-03-19-ninth-kokkos-tea-time/) to be built and run in `devc_hellow`. One can see in the `CMakeLists.txt` file that CMake expects Kokkos to be installed, in order to build the project. The container image takes care of this requirement.

> In `devcontainer.json`, one can specify a "postStartCommand". For e.g., it is defined as "cmake -DKokkos_ROOT=/opt/kokkos-install -DKokkos_ENABLE_OPENMP=ON -B build" in our case. This ensures that a `build` directory is generated by CMake. See below for some observations with Docker and Podman regarding "postStartCommand". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `devcontainer.json`, one can specify a "postStartCommand". For e.g., it is defined as "cmake -DKokkos_ROOT=/opt/kokkos-install -DCMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS=ON -B build" in our case. This ensures that a `build` directory is generated by CMake, and that compile commands are exported (helpful for getting Intellisense to work). See below for some observations with Docker and Podman regarding "postStartCommand". 
```

#### Observations

* Currently, "postStartCommand" works only with Docker and not with Podman. One gets an error like the following with Podman:

      Error: error parsing environment variables: name "\afbfa9712-93dc-4bca-8ecc-99ffb315ae27\x1b]0;vscode@mdlspc111.extra.cea.fr: cat /proc/self/environ\aREMOTE_CONTAINERS_IPC" has white spaces, poorly formatted name
      [147463 ms] postStartCommand from devcontainer.json failed with exit code 125. Skipping any further user-provided commands.
* Podman takes more time to build and run the container. Probably, it takes more time to restart a container also.
* With Podman, VS Code disconnects and reconnects to the container from time to time.

> Probably, these issues with Podman can be resolved by using a more recent version of Podman. For example, VS Code recommends version 5+. However, Podman offers much better support for Red Hat distributions like Fedora. 

Reviewer: Note that I did not get any issue using podman, but as you mention it might be because I have a fairly recent version (5.8.2)

Author: Hi Trévis, could you also specify your OS? I suppose it is Fedora. Which version?

Reviewer: It's fedora 43

Author: Thank you!

Author: I see that you have mentioned all the related version information in a comment. That is good.

#### Some technical points
* In order to enable networking while building the container, define `"build"` as `"build": { …, "options": ["--network=host"], …}`. This may be needed in order to `git clone` the Kokkos repository.  Also, note that `“runArgs”: [“--network=host”]` is for enabling network connection while running the container.

> * Setting the environment variable `CPATH` as `CPATH="/opt/kokkos-install/include:$CPATH"` helps with IntelliSense recognizing Kokkos header files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* In the Command Palette enter ">Dev Containers: Rebuild Without Cache and Reopen in Container" whenever you need to rebuild the container after making changes to either `devcontainer.json` or `Dockerfile`.

#### To explore further

> * Kokkos functions are incorrectly flagged by IntelliSense.

Reviewer: Addressed by the compile_commands thing
```suggestion
```

* Defining a non-root [USER](https://www.docker.com/blog/understanding-the-docker-user-instruction/) in `Dockerfile`.
* "postStartCommand" vs "postCreateCommand" to generate `build` directory.
* Try installing the following extensions in VS Code to check for a better experience with Podman.

>   * "Container Tools" and "Pod Manager". Note: These extensions have been released relatively recently.

Reviewer: I only needed to install the dev container extension for it to work
